 URL: http:www.nytimes.com20160629nyregionmosquitoes-diseases-zika-virus.html With the spread of the Zika virus, the threat posed by the tiny mosquito has been magnified into shark-size proportions. But among the more than 3,000 species of the insect worldwide, only two in the Americas are known carriers of the virus: the yellow fever mosquito (Aedes aegypti) and the Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus). The potential range of the two species in the United States helps explain where <name>Zika</name> could be a threat. The yellow fever mosquito, for instance, prefers the hot and humid climate in Florida and the southeastern part of the country. But it has colonized states as far west as California and Hawaii, and has the potential to live as far north as Connecticut in warmer weather, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Asian tiger mosquito, meanwhile, also favors tropical and subtropical locales but can withstand cooler temperatures, so it can range farther. In summertime, the insect can sometimes even be found in northern states like Maine and Minnesota. Maps showing where the species might survive, notably, exempt the Northwest, the Mountain West and northern parts of the Midwest. But <name>Zika</name> is not the only disease that mosquitoes can carry. Other threats include West Nile virus, dengue fever and various types of encephalitis. In all, there are about 174 species of mosquitoes in the United States, according to <name>Joseph M. Conlon,</name> a retired Navy entomologist who is a technical adviser to the nonprofit American Mosquito Control Association. Texas has the most species, with about 85, and West Virginia has the least, with roughly 24. New York City alone has more than 50 species. A vast majority of these species in the United States, Mr. <name>Conlon</name> said, do not transmit any disease. Whether they do depends, in part, on their physiology. Most viruses (and other microorganisms) are simply digested in the mosquito gut along with the blood. But other viruses have evolved to penetrate the mosquito’s body cavity and migrate to the salivary glands, from which they are injected with salivary fluid when the mosquito feeds. Those are the diseases that mosquitoes can transmit. Certain bacteria, like Wolbachia, have also been shown to interfere with transmission. Other factors that affect their disease-spreading potential include feeding habits, where they lay eggs and the density of the infected population compared with the human population. And only female mosquitoes bite. Here are six of the most common disease-spreading offenders endemic to the United States. An intensely black mosquito, distinguishable by its pointed abdomen and two white stripes in the shape of a lyre on its back (the dorsal thorax), and white bands on its legs. They primarily bite humans, rather than other animals, and they like to feed indoors. The combination makes them particularly dangerous when it comes to spreading disease. They are also fidgety. They will eat several partial meals on multiple victims, called sip-feeding. It is one way they pass pathogens. Females draw blood to nourish their eggs. They prefer to lay them in clean water, including birdbaths, clogged gutters, pet bowls, bottle caps and even shower drains. The eggs stick to the sides of containers and can survive drying out. Most cases of Zika, which can cause debilitating birth defects including microcephaly, have been transmitted through this aggressive insect. It can also carry the viruses that cause dengue fever, chikungunya and yellow fever. The species rarely flies more than a block in its lifetime. It is mostly found in the South and the Southwest. But it has been found in New Jersey, southern Connecticut and New York City, though not necessarily in large populations. Experts theorize that the areas at greatest risk for a Zika outbreak are poor urban areas along the Gulf Coast. But the C.D.C. is focusing its mosquito control efforts more broadly in areas of California, Texas, Florida, Hawaii, Arizona and Louisiana, which